The conventional concept of 'getting in touch with your emotions' becomes fraught when viewed from the perspective of evolutionary psychology.  It has always been fraught, actually, but EP illuminates why.  Of course, it is a misnomer to say that one is better off 'getting in touch with one's emotions' a an hard-and-fast rule.  It is a little like saying it is better to 'relax all of one's muscles'.  A good physical therapist will tell you that there are muscles that, when they become chronically tense, cause pain and posture problems, but that also there are muscles that are meant to remain somewhat tense all the time, so that you can do things like stand and breath.  You really don't want to mess around willy-nilly with your body's operating system.  

The same should go for the 'emotional system' (which coincidentally has something to do with where you carry tension in your body, but that's not my point here.) The paleo cortex is filled with ancient imperatives to eat, breath, have sex, kill, etc. Those all translate into emotions in the mid-brain, along with second-order instincts having to do with, say, socialization.  Then these are governed, loosely speaking, by neocortical structures that improve socialization to the point of making civilization possible.  At what point is an emotion just a part of the operating system that we are better remaining unaware of, and at what point is it something our conscious mind must address and perhaps try to eliminate, assuming that is even possible?  Like a computer, we sometimes want to go down into the operating system and change things--if possible--but as a general rule, if the system is running well enough, we let it be and keep moving forward.  Of course, deciding when to stop and make a repair is a very knotty problem.

So where did this notion come from, that we should all be in touch with our emotions all the time?  It comes from our genomic nature, of course, specifically, the programs that deploy when hierarchy arises. The dominant caste must be emotionally insensitive.  If a dominant male sees a subordinate chimp trying to get it one with a dominant female, he slaps that chimp, and he slaps him hard.  He can't be sitting around feeling, 'Oh, that must have hurt, poor guy.' In the same way, dominance as expressed through social hierarchy requires insensitivity.  What happened, especially in the 1960's and 70's, is that critics of hierarchy, assuming a non-dominant posture, latched on to the emotional opaqueness needed to enforce arbitrary inequality, and try to break through it.  And because humans are driven to create a phenotype monoculture based on their own phenotypical behavioral profile, this morphed into an axiom that all people must be in touch with all emotions all the the time.  

Nowadays, the talk is of empathy. Michelle Obama underscored the importance of empathy in her speech at the Democratic National Convention in 2020.  On the face of it, there is nothing wrong with encouraging empathy, but let's look at it in the context of what is roughly called 'racial justice.' Was is empathy that resulted in the Civil Rights Act?  Certainly white Americans, for the first time, bore witness in unprecedented numbers to police beating peaceful black protestors, brutalizing them with attack dogs and fire hoses.  So, yes, empathy.  But did they cultivate a disciplined, conscious approach to empathy, of the kind that would be necessary to remain empathetic, even when it becomes difficult to do so?  Did they learn how to be empathetic *even when it goes against their own self-interest?*  And isn't that the *sine qua non* of empathy?  If empathy ends where self-sacrifice begins, it is not empathy at all.  

That program to be empathetic--but only up to a point--is very much a facet of the evolved behavioral program of dominance.  It is always beneficial for a ruler to show mercy. Terroristic rule has a tendency to galvanize opposition to the point of revolution.  By throwing a bone now and then, in strategic ways, a ruler can maintain rule, even if they are often brutal and widely despised.  And we saw that this is what happened with the Civil Rights act.  It made sense for the dominant caste to relent on the issue of segregation.  But that does not imply that they became empathetic in any meaningful way. And, in fact, what we saw was that whites doubled-down on their subjugation of blacks in every other way, now that the legal mechanism had been dismantled.       
