KellyAnne Conway, famously, talked about 'alternative facts.' I forget exactly what she was talking about.  Does it matter?  I could go back and dig up the clip, I suppose, but there isn't enough antacid in the world.

Luckily, it really doesn't matter what she was talking about. I'm not going to insist she was somehow being truthful. She does (or, at least did) often bend the truth past its breaking point. But I am about to insist that the reaction from the left was unfair and off-base.  

It's clear to me that when she said, 'alternative facts' she was saying, "You are presenting one set of facts. I am presenting another set of facts." It's not that one set of facts is somehow less factual, it's just that one set is being taken seriously (by the interviewer) and one, equally valid set of facts is being ignored.

Essentially, if she had said 'additional facts,' or if she had explicitly said, "You are cherry-picking the facts to support a biased agenda, and here are the facts you are ignoring," there would have been no fallout from the remark.  And, for all I know, the questioner *was* cherry-picking the facts.  

This sheds light on an important issue.  When someone makes an argument, whether in politics or elsewhere, it can be based on a solid foundation of well-established facts and still be wrong.  (By 'wrong' we mean, of course, 'not probably true.') Most listeners, however, are not aware that this is a possibility.  If they are introduced to a series of facts and the facts are verifiable, they will be happy to entertain any conclusion drawn from those facts.  "It just makes sense!" they may say to themselves.

I want to emphasize that this is very much the way human reason was designed to function--to make decisions based on the facts at hand.  To be sure, we have also evolved to furnish some crazy definitions of 'fact.' For instance, I could say, "Given the fact that Alice used witchcraft to summon a bolt of lightning to kill Bob..." and depart towards a conclusion from there.  And I would not be alone, by a long stretch, if I did that.  Witchcraft, by that name or some other, has been taken as a fact of life by many, many people all over the world for eons.  But, we do have the capacity as human beings, in the absence of such flights of fancy, to appreciate when a fact is well-verified.  And it is in that context--that of a sufficiently well-attested set of facts--that we still find room for catastrophic error.

The catastrophe arises because we don't seem to be sufficiently diligent about verifying whether a set of good facts represents *all the relevant facts* that are available. Again, this is a product of the evolution of human reasoning.  On average, spending too much time considering an issue (say, a life-or-death issue for your tribe, back in the day) will result in a failure to act, and adverse consequences--at least in the context of a small group surviving in a state of nature.  Yes, some individuals will ponder a problem longer than others, but on average, a group decision must be made before before a failure to act results in a failure to survive.  This necessity to act in a timely manner comes paired with a ever-present reality: throughout our evolution, a large body of relevant facts was simply unavailable.  For instance, Alice would have found it handy if she knew something about electrons gathering in the upper atmosphere.  She might have been able to explain how Bob could have been struck by lightning without any intervention on her part, magical or otherwise.  Also, if at least some of those debating her fate after the accusation knew a little about electrons, they might contribute to a different group decision about whether to burn poor Alice at the stake or not.  However, these facts did not exist for half-a-million years of human history--and neither did the vast majority of the facts to which we now have such easy access.  

So, when evolution hit upon this 'shortcut--' gimme the facts, gimme what you got, do it quick, we have a decision to make--it came by it honestly.

Nowadays, this presents us with two problems: one, we have a tendency to content ourselves with a convenient set of facts, rather than the entire set of relevant facts; and, two, there are just too many damn facts available to us now--too many to sift through and figure out which ones are 'relevant' and which aren't.  No time for that: we have decisions to make!  

One solution to this problem, if we can manage it, is to switch focus from 'facts' to 'methodology.' Good facts (the ones we call 'valid' or 'confirmed' or 'well-supported') are the result of good methodology.  Good methodology, by definition, involves a survey of all available facts, and the careful selection of that subset of those facts which are relevant to the point being made. Good methodology also entails that this process of selecting relevant facts be an open one, subject to review, especially by qualified experts.  

All of which is to say, a valid argument is based on valid methodology.  Valid methodology entails the steps listed above, and a lot other steps not yet mentioned.  And so, here is a fact to chew on: it is absolutely impossible, for you as an individual, to engage in valid methodology.

It's simply not something that one person can possibly do.  It doesn't matter how smart you are, how hard-working you are, how much hands-on experience you have, or even how much information you have in your head. All of these are good things to have, and may help you to find a valid argument to make your point, but it is still impossible for you make that valid argument on your own.  

That is, looking at the population of valid facts available, selecting the correct subset of relevant facts, questioning and refining that selection--just those steps alone, which are only the beginning of a longer process--cannot be done by any single human being.  =You could sooner swim to the moon.  

This not to say that sometimes, by necessity, decisions have to be mad quickly based on the facts immediately available.  Doctors, for instance, must do this all the time.  Still, a good doctor will follow a good methodology, something like: investigate as many facts as you can, assess their reliability, don't ignore inconvenient facts that contradict your first theory, etc.  They just have to go through that process quickly before the person they are trying to help gets worse or dies.  And, inevitably, sometimes they get it wrong.  Sometime having more time would have made all the difference.  

But we often rush decisions that have no ticking clock.  In the modern context, we may feel the urgency to decide when there is no object need to decide so quickly.  This is hard for people, some more than others, and they come by it honestly: they are part of the human genome, and the genome will show up differently in different individuals.

The opposite of this appears not as a natural inclination, but as a deliberate strategy.  That is, to involve those around you in an endless search that never concludes because you feel you and your will benefit from inaction on the issue.  That must be guarded against as much as deciding too hastily.

What this means is that, when it comes things like public policy, we are often in a situation that is important, but no necessarily urgent.  We can take time to assemble all the relevant facts, use the right methodology, and come up with a conclusion that is most probably true.  But such conclusions are very unlikely to be arrived at via the traditional process of debate.  And since pretty much all legislatures are structured on debate as a fundamental virtue, when it comes to arriving at objective truth, all legislatures are fundamentally ill-equipped to do so.    
