---
layout: post
title: Why Go Big?
postHero: /images/hamburger.png
author: OmneBonum
postFooter: omnebonumest@gmail.com
---
DSUp aims to facilitate the creation, simultaneously or in rapid succession, of direct legislatures in every one of the 435 Federal Congressional Districts in the United States.

This prompts some obvious questions. Isn't that overly ambitious?  Why not try it out on the local level, see how it goes?  Get the public to become engaged in the process at the level of a city or a town, maybe a county or a state. Iron out the kinks.  If it is a good idea, people will like it and the idea will spread!

This way of looking at democratic change has a long history. Politicians talk, sometimes quite sincerely, about wanting a more 'active and informed constituency.' Non-profits dedicate themselves to promoting 'public engagement.' Recently the concept has been characterized as a 'trickle-up' phenomenon, which is seen as the ideal when it comes to this sort of thing. Its ethos is embodied in phrases like, "Think globally, act locally." This kind of reasoning has worn a shiny groove into our thinking about democratic change and how it can, or more to the point, should, proceed.

The quick response to this battery of questions is that such local efforts to implement direct legislation have already been tried. Where they do not fail outright, they certainly fail to catch on and spread to other localities. So the principle that comes into play here is, "Don't keep trying something that is clearly not working." (A popular meme about the definition of insanity might be recalled here.)

On the face of it, it is rather confounding that such seemingly commonsense, and even inspirational ideas, could be wrong.  At least wrong enough that they never seem to produce the results they aim to inspire.  

To understand it better, let's think about feudalism.

A feudal society is organized with a monarch at the top. Roughly speaking, the monarch divvies up the land among various 'nobles.' They then administer that property (which includes people of course) on the monarch's behalf. Commerce and the treasury are regulated in this top-down fashion, and all profit generated trickles up, ultimately, to the crown.

Now, imagine someone says, "Hey, in this one town, in this one fiefdom, lets experiment with a different kind of system." Imagine what you will. Perhaps some sort of representative democracy, giving all adult male peasants a vote. Some sort of profit-sharing scheme.  

It really doesn't matter what you imagine. Even if you could get the earl or duke who commands that town, that piece of land, to go along with it, there is always the monarch to contend with.  And even if, somehow, you got the monarch to assent to your experiment, he or she still wields absolute power. The royal court is still full of courtiers, plying the monarch for patronage and favors. Such people would not be expected to rally around your experiment. In fact, we can be sure that many would actively seek to undermine it. Even among the oppressed, the logic of the system imposes beliefs upon them, which they think of as their own, and which preserve the system. Every tendency to act, being generated by the feudal system itself, would surround your laudable efforts at reform, envelop it, and ultimately crush it.

This is why representative democracy, our system of government, had such a hard time coming into being. Perhaps this why modern democracy sprang up in a colony, in a new, far-away land where the old social relations were weakened.

Of course, we don't live in a feudal society, but many of the same dynamics, many of the same foibles of human nature, come into play even in a representative democracy.  America has its fiefdoms, its dukes and earls, in political and economic guise. It has its own 'self-preserving' ideology that penetrates into the beliefs and actions of even those who don't really benefit from it.  To be clear, what we have in America is better, exponentially better, than feudalism.  The intent here is not to take pot shots at the current system. This is only by way of a metaphor to shed light on the problem of 'trickle up' transformational change.
