---
layout: post
title: Just Do It!
postHero: /images/running_man.png
author: OmneBonum
postFooter: omnebonumest@gmail.com
---
What exactly will our democracy look like when direct legislation is the norm?  

It's hard to say.  So many decisions have yet to be made.  Those decisions will be based on circumstances that are hard to anticipate.  And those decisions should rightfully be made by the people themselves.  They certainly shouldn't be dictated by the DSUp Project.

The questions have to do with the precise form of organization necessary to put a system of direct legislation into effect.  How do we give everyone a say when there are 200 million people in the mix?  How do we prevent disastrous, spontaneous decisions that might scuttle the ship of state? Who does what and when? Some delegates will be essentially working full-time. Do we <em>pay them??</em>  If so, where does the money come from? Will self-government based on direct legislation be more radical or more conservative?  Will it result in a nightmarish propagation of laws and regulation, or will it result in a stalemate where nothing at all can get done?  In short, will it be an improvement worth the effort, or a horrible mistake?

Here, I would like to quote the wisdom of two great poets, Frey and Browne, who once said:

"Take it easy, take it easy.
Don't let the sound of your own wheels
Drive you crazy."

Probably the best way to look at it (the way I look at it) is that, since direct legislation is a fundamental right, we have no choice but to implement it, come hell or high water.

An analogy might be drawn to the founding of the United States back in the day.  In essence, the founders were simply saying, "The division of society into classes, such as 'aristocracy' and 'working class,' into which men are born and inclusion in which determines a man's future rights and freedoms, that system is a load of crap." (I paraphrase.)  The inevitable outcome of that observation, though, is the assertion that 'all men are created equal'.  That's the fundamental proposition. But can an entire system of government be built upon that proposition?  That's a whole separate headache.  

And, if we recall our high school American History class (which we mostly don't, but no matter) establishing a government on top of that ideal wasn't easy.  The first attempt--the Articles of Confederacy--foundered.  The creation of the constitution was contentious. (I think there is even a musical about it.)

But the question wasn't 'can it be done.' The question was, "Given that it must be done, how do we do it?"

That is the way I hope people look at DSUp.

It is easy to foretell catastrophe. It's satisfying. It is even fun. And catastrophizers often have good points that should be taken seriously, embedded in their dire warnings.  But the fact is, every leap forward in improving democracy has always been greeted with a chorus of doubt and gloomy foreboding.

That is why we say, to hell with it, let's just do it.  Let's just put a system of direct legislation into place.  We need to take a little time to outline the basic features of the system, and underscore how it differs from legislation by referendum, direct democracy, mobocracy, and other inadequate implementations of the basic concept.  But once we are done with that, we need to move expeditiously forward into make direct legislation a concrete reality.

The beauty is, the DSUp approach leaves the final form of the 'direct legislature' created in any given district up to the participants.  That is, by its nature, a Democracy Straight-Up Legislature is autonomous and self-governing. By necessity, we are going to try to prescribe some elements of how a DSUL will function. But whatever doesn't work can be changed by the DSUl itself.  

One way to look at DSUp is as scaffolding.  It doesn't have to be pretty.  Scaffolding is not a building.  To continue with the metaphor, a scaffold disappears once the building is built.  But it is a necessary first step that allows for the building to be built at all.  There is need to make a scaffold 'perfect.' It just needs to be good enough to get the job done.  

And so, in sum, as a famous brand of shoe once said, let's just do it, okay?  
